Chapter 5: Communication between agents 
I. Introduction
The essential point of a multi-agent system lies in the collective of agents that constitute it: 
society of agents  social behavior  inter-agent communication, why? 
agents must communicate to cooperate and coordinate their actions and achieve their 
goals 
by communicating, they can influence other Agents to perform an action or change the 
data of the internal state of other Agents 
For example: if I say "it's raining in Algiers" I try to influence you (change your internal 
state (beliefs)), 
communication can be established at different levels: 
1) simple requests with a simple and concise set of possible answers; 
2) more complex communication in an appropriate protocol for example for a 
conversation in a negotiation 
II. Society 
II.1. Modes of Organization 
Organization: The way in which the group is structured in order to work (no unified definition). 
This organization is described by: 
The interactions between agents and the various forms of links that exist between two or 
a small number of agents. 
The set of components, roles, and activities of the agents, their responsibilities, their 
resource needs (processors), and their communication or coordination links within 
organizational structures. 
The dynamics of a large number of agents, as well as the overall structure of the system 
and its evolution. 
The organization of agents implies social behaviors that require a means of communication 
allowing agents to exchange information or send requests. 
1 
III. Agent Communication
III.1. Problem: 
Communications, in MAS as in humans, are the basis of interactions and organization. A 
communication model is summarized by the following questions addressed: 
who communicates what and to whom (Modality of communication)? 
sender and recipient(s) of the message (the agents it involves, human or artificial). 
The choice of interlocutor essentially depends on the agent's acquaintances (knowledge 
that the agent has about other agents). 
What to communicate? need to communicate their intentions, goals, results and status 
What to communicate? the content of the messages (exchange of signals, requests, plans, 
offers, knowledge), their type and, their form 
When do agents communicate? 
- identification of situations where they need to interact with other agents to 
achieve their local or global goals. 
- what provokes or motivates it (commitment, explicit intentionality or interaction 
triggered by a perception), 
- what it induces directly (modification of beliefs, appearance of conflicts, 
problems of coherence) or indirectly in terms of reaction to a perception through 
the environment. 
How do agents communicate? 
- resources and protocol used 
- their channel (direct by sending messages or indirect by the environment): mode 
of communication: direct or indirect 
Why do agents communicate? : To coordinate their activities, to cooperate, collaborate, 
negotiate: the implementation of the interaction, 
III.2. Modes of communication 
There are two modes of communication: direct by sending messages or indirect by the 
environment 
III.2.1. Indirect (or implicit) communications 
Agents leave traces (signals) of their presence or action that are perceived by other agents. The 
environment propagates (and possibly distorts) the signals triggered by the performance of an 
action. This mode is characterized by: 
2 
- limited exchanges 
- not having to precisely determine the role of each individual in the collective treatment 
III.2.1. Direct (or explicit) communications 
The direct exchange is carried out voluntarily in the direction of an individual or group of 
individuals. There are two types of direct communication: communication by sharing 
information and communication by sending messages. 
a) communication by information sharing 
Agents read and drop information on a common data area (eg: blackboard). They 
communicate via a shared data structure where we find the knowledge relating to the 
resolution, which evolves during the execution process. 
data structure: shared and possibly partitioned 
blackboard model: sources of knowledge + central board + control component 
KSAR = (module, list of hypotheses) and Agenda = list of KSAR: Knowledge 
Source Activation Record. 
1. modules create KSAR in calendar 
2. control chooses a KSAR 
3. the chosen KSAR is triggered and a combination of actions is performed 
on the board 
3 
The example generally taken is that of the construction of a puzzle. Schoolchildren are 
not allowed to communicate with each other, but observe the pieces already placed on the board. 
As soon as a student realizes that he can make a contribution, that is to say contribute to solving 
the problem, he raises his hand. The teacher (who ensures the control) chooses among the raised 
hands who must go and put his piece on the board. The sum of the individual contributions 
finally completes the puzzle. 
In blackboard terminology, students are called knowledge sources (denoted KS for 
Knowledge Source). Each KS has the right to create and modify the data present on the 
blackboard. When a KS can be activated (ie its activation conditions are true), a KSAR 
corresponding to this possibility of activation is created and placed in the schedule of the table. 
The control then consists in choosing among the KSARs of the agenda which one will be 
activated. 
The following figure illustrates how a blackboard works. It is a sequential operation -- 
there is only one KS active at a given moment --, and opportunistic -- we do not know in 
advance which KS will be active at a given moment. 
The operating cycle of a blackboard is quite simple in principle: 
[(1)] According to the elements present in the blackboard, if a KS can be activated, the 
controller creates a corresponding KSAR in the agenda. This step is repeated as many 
times as there is KS whose activation conditions are fulfilled. 
4 
[(2)] The KSARs of the agenda are ordered according to different strategies and 
according to the type of control. The KSAR corresponding the most to the selection 
strategy is finally chosen. 
[(3)] The KS of the KSAR chosen in the previous step is triggered. This generally results 
in modifying the blackboard by adding new elements, destroying certain elements, or 
modifying elements already present. The cycle resumes at the first step and operation 
continues as long as there are KSARs in the schedule. 
- Advantages of blackboards are: little information loss, very fast error correction. 
- Disadvantages of blackboards: risk of accumulation of useless data, vocabulary constraints, 
depending on the field of application. 
b) communication by sending a message 
Agents send their messages directly and explicitly to the recipient. There are two modes: 
1. point-to-point communication (telephone): the agent sending the message knows and 
specifies the address of the recipient agent(s). This type of communication is generally 
the most used by cognitive agents. It will be noted as follows: (id) <sender>: <recipient> 
<< <state> 
2. communication by broadcast: the message is sent to all agents in the system. This type 
of transmission is widely used in dynamic systems as well as reactive agent systems. In 
fact, this generally assumes messaging: a specialized agent manages as many queues as 
there are recipients, each agent can process the first message in its queue. 
5 
Needs related to an exchange of messages: Agents must know: 
with which other agents to communicate 
how to establish a communication channel with them 
which protocol used for the dialogue 
what language used to exchange knowledge 
which terms of the language used to guarantee that the other agent will interpret the 
expressions in the same sense 
how to deal with unnecessary information and possible erroneous data that appear from 
different views of the world 
Benefits 
freedom of expression 
communication flexibility 
parallelism 
Disadvantages 
loss of information 
correction of difficult errors 
communications saturation 
Theoretical elements for sending a message 
Communication by message exchange is based on: 
- communication theory (resulting from research in Telecommunications by Shannon and 
Weaver (Shannon and Weaver 1948)) hence the need for communication languages and 
protocols 
- the theory of speech acts  Illocutionary acts 
To communicate, an agent must read/understand/manipulate messages. It exchanges 
messages based on the classical model of communication theory. In fact, the semantics of the 
communication is shared by the sender and the receiver: 
- Assumes a common communication language 
- Problems of the definition of standards. 
6 
There are two basic types of messages: assertions and queries. 
- Messages with a fixed meaning  intentional communications 
- The notion of communication serves from the simple transmission of information to more 
elaborate forms, such as: speech acts and conversational structure which emphasize 
the notion of interaction in communications. 
III.3. Communication between Agents Vs communication between Objects 
- Semantics of communication between objects: dependent on the recipient of the message 
(concept of polymorphism) 
- Semantics of an agent communication language (ACL): must not depend on the 
participating agents 
- More powerful communication between agents: allows complex data, logical 
information, commands, scripts or even complete programs (case of mobile agents) 
IV. speech act 
IV.1. context of the philosophy of language 
Communication between agents uses human verbal communication as a model of 
communication, inspired by the theory of speech acts. 
Speech act theory (Philosophers Austin and J.-R.Searle) is a major theory in the philosophy of 
language that is of great interest for the analysis of point-to-point symbolic communications in 
multi-systems. -agents. In philosophy of language: meaning representation of a state of affairs 
(true/false). Sentences are not only true or false: an utterance aims to accomplish an action which 
consists in modifying the state of the world: To speak is to act  a speech act. 
Actions: requests, suggestions, commitments and responses 
7 
In the context of MAS, the notion of Speech Act allows an agent A to communicate to an agent 
B not only a proposition P but also the Intention that A takes about P and B. Therefore, speech 
acts designate the set of intentional actions performed during a communication. It induces an 
action and produces effects on the recipient in order to transform his mental state. 
Speech act theory treats communication as an action (carried out by agents like other actions, 
with the aim of pursuing intentions) "To communicate is to act" 
“Communication: an intentional action characterized by a type and several components” (Austin 
62 and Searle 69) IV.2. 
Types of speech acts 
Speech acts can be classified as follows: 
- informative: assert a fact - Ex: "Ali is 4 years old" 
- directives: two types - exercises: ask to do something 
- interrogatives: ask a question 
- promissive: commitment to perform an act - Ex: I will teach tomorrow 
- expressive: expressing a state - Ex: I am happy 
- declarative: accomplish an act by _enunciation - Ex: I practice sport 
IV.3. Components of acts 
According to Austin and Searle, in stating any sentence, comprises three action elements (three 
aspects): 
1- locutionary: generation of statements by emission of sound waves or by writing 
characters (production of a sentence in a given language). These acts are satisfied when 
the utterance is correctly formulated. 
2- illocutionary: refers to the type of action (expressed intention) carried out on the listener 
during the formulation of the statement: inform, request to do, request for information, 
answers, promise, proposal, offer. .. Ex: affirm ("it's raining!") or question ("it's 
raining?") 
3- perlocutionary: obtained effects that illocutionary acts can have on the state of the 
addressee (indirect consequences referred to by locution) 
Example: "Give me a key of 12!" 
- locutionary: sentence: "Give me a key of 12!" 
- illocution: the intention of the speaker's message as a request or an order; 
8 
- perlocution: the recipient aims to find it in the toolbox. 
IV.4. Illocutionary act
In communication, the intention of the message is not always easily identified. Speech act theory 
uses the term performative to identify the illocutionary force of utterance. In general, a speech 
act can be seen as having two components: 
 - A performative verb: (for example to ask, to inform, to promise, . . . 
- Observational content (propositional content) 
“The illocutionary function of a speech act is, in the linguistic theory of John Langshaw Austin, 
the message conveyed by an utterance beyond its immediate meaning, that which its locutionary 
dimension translates. For example, the fact, at the table, of pronouncing the phrase "Is there any 
salt?" does not have the function of informing oneself about the (obvious) presence of salt in the 
house (locutionary content of the utterance) but rather expresses that one would like to salt one's 
dish (illocutionary function) and generally results in the fact that one of the guests passes you the 
salt shaker, which is the perlocutionary function of the statement. » 
Example 
- "the door is closed" 
- performative = to request 
- content = "the door is closed" 
- speech act = “please close the door” 
- performative = inform 
- content = "the door is closed" 
- speech act = “the door is closed! » 
- performative = to ask 
- content = "the door is closed" 
- speech act = "is the door closed?" » 
9 
V. Communication languages 
V.1. Constitution and characteristics of language 
To communicate between heterogeneous and autonomous agents requires a shared 
understanding. So we have to provide a common language. Communication languages between 
agents ACL (Agent Communication Language) based on speech acts. They essentially focus on 
how to exhaustively describe acts of communication from a syntactic and semantic point of view 
and supporting a knowledge representation language. The language has the following aspects: 
- a syntax: how the symbols are structured. 
- semantics: what the symbol means (meaning of these symbols) 
- pragmatics specifying: how symbols are interpreted (used) and how communication and 
implementation (how to identify the recipient, initiate and maintain an exchange). 
An Agent-to-Agent Communication Language must be designed as a high-level language 
that ensures: 
- The format used for the knowledge exchange is given by a content language, independent 
of the ACL language (e.g. KIF, FIPA-SL, FIPA-CCL)  syntax 
- The common vocabulary concerns the definitions specified in an ontology  semantic. 
So agents must agree on the content language and the ontology to use 
V.2. Structure of a message 
Any multi-agent language is represented by a data structure (message) comprising the 
following fields: 
Transmitter 
Receiver 
Language used: language in which the real message is written 
Content of the message: the real message that is the subject of the communication 
Ontology: the vocabulary in a given domain so that agents can understand each other 
10 
Set of definitions concerning the message 
V.3. Technical aspects of implementing an ACL 
The technical aspects of implementing an ACL concern the existence, in the 
communication system between agents, of the mechanisms below: 
protocols for the transport layer used (TCP/IP, UDTP, SMTP, IIOP, HTTP) 
high-level protocols (e.g. contract-net, licitations ('auctions'), registration of names) 
infrastructure services (broker, facilitators, loggers etc.) 
a communication control mechanism within the agents. Many communication languages 
between agents (ACL) have been developed: KQML (93, 97), FIPA-ACL (97, 99, 
2000). 
V.4. Communication language KQML "Knowledge Query and Manipulation Language"
KQML is a high-level, message-oriented communication language and protocol designed 
for the exchange of information (knowledge) between software agents. It was proposed in 1993 
by the DARPA-KSE (Knowledge Sharing Effort) consortium to promote the interoperability of 
heterogeneous agents in a distributed application and to develop standards for the sharing and 
reuse of knowledge bases. 
KQML is independent: 
- message content (independent of the ontology and the language used to code the message 
content (e.g. Prolog, STEP, SQL, KIF etc.)). 
- also the transport mechanism (TCP/IP, e-mail, CORBA objects, etc.). This language 
finds its foundations in the theory of speech acts: 
- KQML language primitives are called "performative" 
- define the actions (operations) that agents can use in a dialogue between agents 
11 
The general syntax (format) of the KQML message essentially consists of a performative 
verb associated with content whose representation format is not imposed by the language. 
Conceptually, a KQML message breaks down into three levels: 
1- message level, which makes it possible to identify the type of act (name of the 
performative), the language and the ontology used and which apply to the content; 
2- a communication level, which makes it possible to identify the sender, the receiver and 
unique identifier for the message; 
3- a content level. This is the actual content of the message; it can be written in any 
representation language (eg: PROLOG, KIF, LISP, C, KQML (itself), XML ... etc). 
V.4.1. KQML Reserved Parameters 
V.4.2. The performatives of the KQML communication language 
36 performatives divided into 3 categories: 
The 18 discourse performatives: used to exchange knowledge and information present in 
the agent's knowledge base (ask-if, ask-one, tell, describe, stream-all . . .etc ) 
The 11 interconnection performatives: help to connect agents with each other (register, 
unregister, broadcast, etc.) 
The 7 exceptional performatives: used to change the abnormal course of exchanges 
(error, sorry, standby . . . etc) 
In KQML, any agent is seen as managing a database (DB) Example : 
12 
Example 
13 
V.5. Communication language ACL – FIPA 
The FIPA (Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents) is an organization founded in 
1996 to promote the use of software agents in the industry, has specified a communication 
language between agents named FIPA-ACL. FIPA's ACL language is also based on speech act 
theory and has benefited greatly from KQML's research results. ACL language primitives called 
"communication acts" 
V.5.1. message syntax 
The message syntax is quite similar to that of KQML: 
14 
FIPA-ACL is based on the definition of 2 sets: a set of 21 primitive acts of 
communication, to which are added the other acts of communication that can be obtained by the 
composition of these basic acts. 
A set of predefined messages that all agents can understand 
primitive communicative acts: are defined atomically, ie they are not defined from other 
acts (followed by a star "*"). 
compound communicative acts: are defined from other acts by one of the following 
operations: 
- ";" indicating a sequence of actions 
- through the composition operator " | " indicating a non-deterministic choice of action 
V.5.2. Communication Language Performatives Category ACL - FIPA 
The 21 acts of communication are expressed by performatives in 5 groups: 
1- passing information: inform*, inform-if (macro act), inform-ref (macro act), confirm*, 
disconfirm* 
2- requisition of information: query-if, query-ref, subscribe 
3- negotiation: accept-proposal, cfp, propose, reject-proposal 
4- distribution of tasks (or execution of an action): request*, requestwhen, request￾whenever, agree, cancel, refuse 
5- error handling: failure, not-understood "Inform" and "Request" are the two basic 
performatives for FIPA. 
15 
Examples: 
V.6. Similarities and differences between KQML and FIPA-ACL 
1- They agree on the first and fundamental idea of the philosophy of ordinary language: - 
any utterance is an act (an action) which aims to accomplish (do) something. - the 
messages express an illocution value (performatives or acts of communication) which 
applies to a content (the field: content in both cases). 
2- They are very similar in their basic concepts and principles - are syntactically identical 
(except differences on the names of the performatives) - they both do not imply any 
commitment for a given language for the content 
3- They are different: - at the level of description and theoretical aspects related to 
semantics - at the level of the choice and definitions of the modalities they use (language 
used to describe the states of the agents). - in agent management (registration tasks, 
localization, group membership, etc.) 
16 